---
title: Nosferatu (2024)
postdate: 2025/01/15
---

I found myself profoundly unsatisfied with Nosferatu's (2024) soundtrack and I've been trying to suss out why, precisely, that might be. I certainly don't purport to know anything about film scoring, but I found myself "taken out" of the theater, especially toward the climax and denouement of the film, by a few of the soundscapes that seemed overbearing; incongruous with the spirit or tone of the film.

At first blush the hour-plus-long score, composed by Robin Carolan (who collaborated with Eggers in 2022 on The Northman) suits the subject matter; gravity of the film just fine. Per its official unofficial [YouTube upload by user azc0na](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YwhJT9DdO8):

"[t]he score revolves around one main motif, one that represents Count Orlok himself as well as the threat he poses for the world at large. It's a very simple four note motif that is twisted and played upon, often acting as a backbone for other motifs to sprout off of. It's played on low, dark strings, cellos, a music box for the opening credits, and a lone child soprano. Throat singing and low choral moaning is also used to enhance the atmosphere, and a [sic] whirring, downward droning strings show the twisted nature of his malevolence [...]."

Listening back, though... While I don't doubt that a great deal of care underlay the interleaving of the score's motifs, it's difficult for me to hear past the well-worn Hollywood film scoring tropes to the cogent composition beneath. Competent string writing is rudely butted-in-on by a disembodied, rumbly synth sub-bass that doesn't belong anywhere near a period piece like this, let alone one that pays homage to '20s masterpiece cinema. Ligetian; Pendereckian micro-polyphony is cribbed wholesale for "eerie vibes" but is quickly discarded for another trope---genre-appropriate but unfocused. Likewise with the throbbing concert bass drum that builds under climactic scenes which evokes an epic Peter Jackson battlefield scene more than a more intimate, ultimately character-driven horror. The music box introduction, for heaven's sake.

It seems to me that the work wants to borrow the trappings of the mid-century avant-garde and, by association, of other genre films but does not support them with any particular structure besides, evidently, some familial relation to this four-note motif. There's a core of good film music here, but it's drowned in a soup of genre-appropriate spooky ideas---not to mention a good deal too much reverb.

I'd like to identify the problem as an overeagerness to unify score and sound design... Had the score committed more fervently to its core motif (and development thereof) and stripped the instrumentation down to, say, a string quartet (befitting the era and sparseness of many of the sets, for instance), leaving the spooky sounds to the foley artist, I think it would have been a more successful production overall, sans undesirable sonic allusions to *Lord of the Rings*...
