---
title: Concrete v. ekphrastic directives?
postdate: 2025/03/01
tags: notation
---

Okay, but what really is the difference between "concrete" directives and ekphrastic ones? Do we really have to appeal to cognitive sciences to draw a functional distinction? *fff* is a _symbol_ which denotes (both) a *quality* of resultant sound (a relative degree---i.e. sound considerably louder than that which is marked *ppp*) as well as an *instruction* to a performer (i.e. play in a particular way such that this quality of sound is achieved.

*It could be replaced 1:1 with explanatory text describing the sound quality without any loss of composer intention. It could be substituted with any other symbol bearing the same semantic content.* [This quality characterizes a musical directive, I think...]

Now if we consider a different directive "∵" which the composer keys as "play this passage like a tree" (not far fetched, thinking of composers at least as far back as Satie) we appear to have a symbol functioning in the same way---but it's pure trompe l'œil.

The shorthand glyph ∵ itself bears semantic content---the composer gives it to us in the key. But beneath that... the directive itself is semantically empty. There is no broadly agreed-upon fact of the matter as to what it would be like to "play like a tree".

Naturally, the composer could simply define for the player in natural language some intended rhythmic or timbral effect he hopes to achieve with the directive---loading the directive with semantic content "manually". But this does nothing for us as score-archæologists, well-removed from the rehearsal space where any oral clarifications might have been given.

I take it, anyway, that a composer employing such a curious directive does so because he's interested in the *friction* generated by the collision between the semantic and the asemantic in notation. This is an underappreciated phenomenon! "Asemantic dissonance," or something.

It seems like *the* important attribute of the asemantic, ekphrastic directive is that it *cannot* be substituted---swapped out for an equivalent plain-English directive with concrete musical referents without ceasing to function *as* an ekphrastic directive.

Furthermore, any other seemingly equivalent or complementary directive ("play like you have leaves and branches"; "play like you're made of wood"; "play like a *fir* tree") all irrevocably change the nature of the ekphrasis. __Performing ekphrastic musical inscription is tantamount to the translation of a poem, in contrast with the translation of an Ikea instruction manual!__
