---
title: Mingus Plays Piano
postdate: 2025/01/30
---

Atticus gave me [Mingus Plays Piano](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mingus_Plays_Piano) (Impulse!, 1964) which I'd either never heard or heard so long ago as to have forgotten it. Phenomenal, personal album. I resist reading (as some might) his self-conscious-but-never-affected slop as a reflection of some DSM pathology... I think of it rather as a key stylistic element---a major creative factor in his work into which he leans quite deliberately. His left-hand ostinato fails in "Myself When I Am Real" when he develops an idea in the right because the pursuit of that little idea is more critical than the grid. That point of failure becomes a "clumsy" inflection point---not the sort of thing to be easily transcribed---marking the shift in attention from one gesture to another. And while it is the (points A and B) gestures that form the foreground of the work, the bits one might play if one covered the piece, the slop in between leaves a strong imprint; tints the work in a beautiful, original way that we don't yet know how to notate.

Likewise, it's clear to me that when Mingus (elsewhere) leans hard on an A♮ on the downbeat of a B♭m7 in the first measure of "I X Love" ("Duke's Choice"), he's doing something more than milking a leading tone for its friction, he's expressing that liminal "slop" harmonically. The chord really is a split seventh and that set---however briefly expressed on its way to its local resolution---defines the work in a way that it wouldn't in a normal, cadential figure.

The slop that reviewers reductively attribute to Mingus' lack of experience on the instrument ("He's no virtuoso, but nevertheless...") plays out too in uneven melodic figurations---trills and brief runs in the head to "Memories of You" that clearly evoke Tatum (with whom he studied for a while, someone said) but which, contra Tatum, sputter and flam where they need to. This is an critical (a/e)ffect which Mingus carries with him into his role as a bandleader and suffuses his entire corpus, and is so key to the music's sublimity (mostly absent, I think, in the tribute records I've heard---I'd be happy to be wrong).

I guess I just lament that for a hundred reasons I mostly hear this sort of "calculated" failure play out in more wholly improvised musics and less in highly-idiomatic musics like jazz now---I want to be more confused about what's going on! 
