---
title: Sculptural and mobile works
postdate: 2025/01/04
---

Consider two improvisatory musical works: (a) the sculptural work which organizes sound in the traditional fashion (melody, rhythms, and changes fixed; improvisation included at predetermined points for fixed durations) and (b) the mobile work [if you like] whose structural elements are themselves determined in-the-moment. In the former category are many traditional jazz forms. Tunes from the Great American Songbook permit the time-tested fixed---open---fixed cyclical structure which forms the core of jazz practice. An Ellington big band arrangement fits the paradigm even more tightly given that so many voicings, hits, lines may be planned in advance for the fixed moments. The broad contours we associate with the work are fixed; repeatable; recognizable and open play is tightly constrained; rule-mediated.

Works in the latter category may (or may not) bear many of the same structured elements---fixed pitches, rhythms---but critically their arrangement in time is itself contingent on players' in-the-moment decisions. Game pieces; cellular compositions; asemantic "graphic" works. In BOTH types, the composer brings to the table encoded sounds or actions which disambiguate the work and the performer enacts these and further spins them out into a unique, improvised expression of that work.

I guess my question is this: How does the relationship between work and expression differ in structurally rigid v. structurally mobile improvisatory works?
