---
title: Chewing on the IFLA LRM
postdate: 2025/02/05
tags:
    - library
    - works
---

Let's assume, per the [IFLA LRM](https://www.ifla.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/assets/cataloguing/frbr-lrm/ifla-lrm-august-2017_rev201712.pdf), that the conceptual and real artifacts resulting from musicking (or indeed any art-making) can be meaningfully broken down into mutually exclusive entities: works, expressions, manifestations, and items.

The song "Body and Soul"---that is, the collection of attributes that identify something as belonging to the "Body and Soul" family---is the work. This work is manifested in many expressions---recorded performances, transcriptions into traditional notation, string quartet arrangements, highly abstract versions for solo harp, reharmonized versions with new lyrics. Each of these expressions, the model claims, only comes into being once the symbols or signs that identify it are captured on one or more carriers: the sound is recorded to phonodisc; the notes are written down on manuscript paper.

One expression ([Coleman Hawkins' seminal 1939 recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5jTWvgOJbNk), let's say) might have many associated manifestations---the original shellac; part of a compilation re-released on LP; the CD re-master. Finally, each of these manifestations. Finally each of these manifestations will have one or more associated items---physically-extended things onto which one might drop a needle.

This is the beating heart of how we organize information into bibliographic "universes" of entities and collections of attributes. A core tenet of the model holds that each of these four categories of entity (there are many more) are mutually exclusive. The [1966 Deutsche Grammophon recording of Tristan](https://www.discogs.com/release/2996680-Wagner-B%C3%B6hm-Tristan-Und-Isolde-Bayreuth-1966) is not itself a work---rather, it is a manifestation of a particular expression (say, a particular orchestral arrangement) of the work Tristan composed by Richard Wagner.

Take, though, a virtuosic piano reduction of the Tristan's prelude. The model grants a measure of leeway here:

> "...the exact criteria that delimit instances of the work entity are not governed by the model. As a result, the model does not prescribe the level of adaptation required so that a given expression based on an existing expression should be regarded as just another expression of the same work, rather than as an expression of a distinct work." (pg. 10)

Here an analyst may decide that the piano reduction shares enough expression-level attributes with the representative expression that we may fairly call it an expression of the original work (a secondary or subsidiary expression or some such.) Or she may decide that the reduction so transforms the representative expression as to merit consideration as an expression of a wholly distinct work (the work being, I guess, Tristan for Piano or something).

This leeway seems appropriate given that what precisely constitutes a work or an instance of that work varies contextually---and the LRM's documentation points this out. This raises some interesting questions---indeed gives us a new way to ask "what constitutes a musical work?".

I find myself wondering, though, what the consequences might be if we allow that some thing (a conceptual thing, in this case) might be allowed to have both work-level and expression-level attributes? If, rather than pointing to some new work like Tristan for Piano, our new expression expresses work-level attributes associated with that representative expression? Maybe I phrased that badly...

To put it another way---we think of "has as composer" as a work-level relationship and "has as arranger" as an expression-level relationship. These are mutually exclusive: a work cannot have an arranger and an expression cannot have a composer. But it seems that in some cases, we might want to conclude that a complex, transformative arrangement might be composed twice---at two different levels.

Speaking from a purely intuitive point of view: If I substantively transform a work (new harmonies and/or new rhythms and/or new libretto and/or ...) , I feel as though I'm creating both an expression of the original work and a wholly new work simultaneously. The one conceptual entity that results (my "Tristan for Piano") seems like it might fairly have attributes of both work and expression concurrently, all in the same bibliographic universe---an intolerable situation for the LRM. I just don't find the present party line of "pick one to suit your needs" fully satisfying but I'm not smart enough yet to really dig into what I'm feeling...
